# Vowel Phonemes
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:a
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example a
graphemes:a,a,a
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:oo
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example oo
graphemes:oo,oo,oo
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:
phonemeType:initiator
phonemeExample:not applicable
graphemes:
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ear
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ear
graphemes:ear,ear,ear
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ae
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ae
graphemes:ae,ae,ae
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:oi
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example oi
graphemes:oi,oi,oi
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:i
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example i
graphemes:i,i,i
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:oe
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example oe
graphemes:oe,oe,oe
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ow
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ow
graphemes:ow,ow,ow
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:o
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example o
graphemes:o,o,o
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ur
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ur
graphemes:ur,ur,ur
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ee
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ee
graphemes:ee,ee,ee
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ar
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ar
graphemes:ar,ar,ar
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:u
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example u
graphemes:u,u,u
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ue
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ue
graphemes:ue,ue,ue
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:e
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example e
graphemes:e,e,e
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:au
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example au
graphemes:au,au,au
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:air
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example air
graphemes:air,air,air
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ie
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example ie
graphemes:ie,ie,ie
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:or
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example or
graphemes:or,or,or
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:er
phonemeType:v
phonemeExample:example er
graphemes:er,er,er
<END PHONEME>
# Consonant Phonemes
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:
phonemeType:initiator
phonemeExample:not applicable
graphemes:
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ch
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example ch
graphemes:ch,ch,ch
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:zh
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example zh
graphemes:zh,zh,zh
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:ng
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example ng
graphemes:ng,ng,ng
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:sh
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example sh
graphemes:sh,sh,sh
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:th
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example th
graphemes:th,th,th
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:wh
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example wh
graphemes:wh,wh,wh
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:c
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example c
graphemes:c,c,c
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:b
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example b
graphemes:b,b,b
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:d
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example d
graphemes:d,d,d
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:g
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example g
graphemes:g,g,g
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:f
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example f
graphemes:f,f,f
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:h
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example h
graphemes:h,h,h
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:k
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example k
graphemes:k,k,k
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:j
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example j
graphemes:j,j,j
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:m
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example m
graphemes:m,m,m
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:l
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example l
graphemes:l,l,l
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:n
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example n
graphemes:n,n,n
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:q
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example q
graphemes:q,q,q
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:p
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example p
graphemes:p,p,p
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:s
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example s
graphemes:s,s,s
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:r
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example r
graphemes:r,r,r
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:t
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example t
graphemes:t,t,t
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:w
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example w
graphemes:w,w,w
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:v
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example v
graphemes:v,v,v
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:y
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example y
graphemes:y,y,y
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:x
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example x
graphemes:x,x,x
<END PHONEME>
<START PHONEME>
phonemeSymbol:z
phonemeType:c
phonemeExample:example z
graphemes:z,z,z
<END PHONEME>
